Not a path pattern expression (#1431)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/expressions/predicates/path-pattern-expressions.adoc

1+d|Rows: 1
|===

[[not-patterns]]

> == Not a path pattern expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Expressions similar to path pattern expressions
```

> Since any expression can be surrounded by parentheses, some expression when parenthesized may be confused for being a path pattern expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since any expression can be wrapped in parentheses, some are very similar to path pattern expressions.
```

> The following lists two examples of parenthesized expression that are not path pattern expression and explains what they are instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
```

`(p:Person)` is not a path pattern expression since it does not have at least one xref::patterns/reference.adoc#relationship-patterns[relationship] or xref::patterns/reference.adoc#variable-length-relationships[variable-length relationship].
Instead, `(p:Person)` is the xref:expressions/predicates/label-expression-predicates.adoc[label expression predicate] `p:Person` in parentheses.

.Parenthesized label expression predicate
[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (employee:Person)-[:WORKS_FOR]->(p)
  WHERE (p:Person)
RETURN employee.name AS employee, (p:Person) AS workForAPeron
----

> The above query has the same result as the query that used `p:Person` instead of `(p:Person)`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The query result however is the same for both `p:Person` and `(p:Person)`:
```

> The above query has the same result as teh query that used `p:Person` in stead of `(p:Person)`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The above query has the same result as the query that used `p:Person` instead of `(p:Person)`:
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (employee:Person)-[:WORKS_FOR]->(p)
  WHERE p:Person

> RETURN employee.name AS employee, p:Person AS workForAPeron

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RETURN employee.name AS employee, p:Person AS workForAPerson
```

----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===

> | employee | workForAPeron

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| employee | workForAPerson
```

| "Cecil" | true
| "Cecilia" | true

2+d|Rows: 2
|===

`(p)` is not a path pattern expression since it does not have at least one xref::patterns/reference.adoc#relationship-patterns[relationship] or xref::patterns/reference.adoc#variable-length-relationships[variable-length relationship].
Instead, `(p)` is the variable `p` in parentheses.

`(p)` does result in the value of variable `p`.
If `p` is not a Boolean, then `(p)` does not result in a Boolean either.
Hence, the following query throws an error:

.Parenthesized node variable
[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
MATCH (employee:Person)-[:WORKS_FOR]->(p)
  WHERE (p)
RETURN employee.name AS employee
----

[source, error]
----
Invalid input 'Node' for `p`. Expected to be Boolean.

> ----

Reviewer 2: Not necessary for this PR, but we should maybe think about starting to use the GQL errors in the Cypher manual instead.

Author: You mean the showing the code? — because the message is what I get on 2025.10.1, i.e. it is the message that comes with the code.

I guess that is a topic for the error team sync. It should have PM involvement, considering how error should be shown in docs (e.g. with position and carrot) and be done as a concerted change to the whole docs.

Reviewer 2: Yes, showing the code and status description rather than or additional to the message. I will write it up for an upcoming error meeting, I agree it does not make much sense to do it for one random example but it should be consistently applied

Reviewer 2: Added it like this to next meeting:

> [LB] Displaying errors  in Cypher docs
> Currently errors in the Cypher manual looks like this with the current message:
> \<screen shot from this PR\>
> 
> Should we instead/additionally show GQLSTATUS and status description (with a link to the error manual maybe)? How do we keep status descriptions up to date in that case?
>

Author: Linking to the status code doc would be very reasonable. The docs colleagues maybe can even come up if a macro so that in the ascii doc sources you only have put the marco with the status code and it will generate a nice up-to-date presentation of the error incl. link to the respective status code doc page.
